Okay.
NOTE CONF
Ready?
Yep.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let me just, uh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Settle down.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So today we have a guest lecture from John Hughes.
Uh, John, uh, did his PhD in Oxford and then
NOTE CONF
spent some time as a professor at Glasgow University, uh,
before moving to Chalmers University in, in Sweden, where he's
NOTE CONF
been, uh, for many years now.
So John is one of the designers of Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so you can complain to him about all the
things that you've been made to learn this semester and,
NOTE CONF
um, and co, uh, co-inventor of QuickCheck, and he has
a company that he uses that, that that uses QuickCheck
NOTE CONF
to help people in industry find bugs in their code.
And so John will be telling us about some experiences
NOTE CONF
with that, I guess.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Thanks, John.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Go ahead.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Can you hear me?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So indeed, I am a professor at Chalmers, as you
NOTE CONF
can see, and co-founder of cubic.
So I'm going to talk about testing today.
NOTE CONF
And I often give this talk to audiences of software
developers for industry.
NOTE CONF
So I'd like to start out by asking them a
question.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to ask you a question to the
same one who really, really loves testing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
1 or 2.
NOTE CONF
You know, I get a similarly enthusiastic response from industrial
software developers.
NOTE CONF
There may be a few people who love it But
actually there are very, very few people go to work
NOTE CONF
in the morning thinking, great, today I get to write
100 tests.
NOTE CONF
It's more testing.
It's something that people do because you have to.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise your software won't work.
So testing, it's something that many people regard as rather
NOTE CONF
hard.
And I just want to consider a little why that
NOTE CONF
is.
Okay, so suppose you're testing some software which has, let's
NOTE CONF
say n different features for some number n.
Generally speaking you'll need to write several tests for each
NOTE CONF
feature.
So let's suppose you write 3 or 4 tests per
NOTE CONF
feature.
That's okay.
NOTE CONF
That's a linear amount of work order n.
That means the amount of work is proportional to n.
NOTE CONF
But everybody who's developed more complex software knows that if
you test one feature at a time, there will be
NOTE CONF
bugs that you miss.
Many bugs only appear when you use two features in
NOTE CONF
combination.
So how many pairs of features are there?
NOTE CONF
Well, obviously roughly n squared.
So that's a quadratic number of test cases that you
NOTE CONF
have to write if you want to test thoroughly.
And you know, even testing every pair of features will
NOTE CONF
not find all of your bugs.
Some of them may only appear when you test when
NOTE CONF
you use three features together.
Okay, so now we're talking about a cubic amount of
NOTE CONF
work.
This does not sound good.
NOTE CONF
And some bugs are caused by what are called race
conditions.
NOTE CONF
That is when the software is doing several things at
the same time.
NOTE CONF
And just depending on what happens to be done first.
What happens to be done second?
NOTE CONF
You can get errors that appear and maybe they will
appear once in a million runs.
NOTE CONF
So you know your software fails.
You wonder why you run it again.
NOTE CONF
It works fine.
That is hair.
NOTE CONF
Terribly difficult.
I'm very, very difficult to test for.
NOTE CONF
So this is, you know, in brief, why people find
testing hard.
NOTE CONF
So what's the answer?
Don't write tests.
NOTE CONF
Generate them.
That's what you've been doing with QuickCheck so far.
NOTE CONF
And that is the approach that I advocate.
So how does QuickCheck work?
NOTE CONF
Well, you have an API under test.
Um, I'm going to talk now about testing software with
NOTE CONF
internal state.
Usually the test cases that we generate for those are
NOTE CONF
sequences of operations, random sequences of operations.
So we just keep generating those until the test fails
NOTE CONF
and when it does.
Um, I hope you've noticed shrinking happening in your own
NOTE CONF
use of QuickCheck.
Usually when a test fails of this sort, then most
NOTE CONF
of the operations are irrelevant.
They're just there because the thing was generated randomly.
NOTE CONF
Normally, there are just a few key operations that are
enough to provoke the failure.
NOTE CONF
So this is where shrinking can kick in and generate
a very small test case that also fails.
NOTE CONF
And debugging those tests where everything that happens is relevant
to the failure.
NOTE CONF
That is very, very easy.
Much easier than debugging a large test with a lot
NOTE CONF
of random junk.
So I like to run a demo at this point,
NOTE CONF
and I'm going to run a demo of a circular
buffer.
NOTE CONF
I don't know whether you know what that is, but,
um, I'll show you a little example so that hopefully
NOTE CONF
it will become clear if I can figure out how
to.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So I've got, um, a few functions that implement a
queue.
NOTE CONF
So what do I mean by a queue?
I mean something that you can put numbers into.
NOTE CONF
In this case, let's make a queue with space for
five elements.
NOTE CONF
And now I'm going to put a one into it.
So this is airline code I'm writing.
NOTE CONF
Erlang is very similar to Haskell actually.
Um it's a different programming language.
NOTE CONF
But if you know Haskell then it's very easy to
learn.
NOTE CONF
So there we are.
I've put one and two into the queue.
NOTE CONF
So you can imagine a queue of people or with
person number one and person number two in it.
NOTE CONF
Now I can ask how many values are in the
queue.
NOTE CONF
What should the answer be?
Two of course.
NOTE CONF
And then I can take values out of the queue.
There's one.
NOTE CONF
What will I get if I call this again?
There it is.
NOTE CONF
What will I get if I call it again?
Three zeros.
NOTE CONF
There's the one again.
There's the two again.
NOTE CONF
Remember I called it a circular buffer.
That's because we go around in a circle.
NOTE CONF
So now we'll get zeros again.
Whoops.
NOTE CONF
And then the one and two again.
And so on.
NOTE CONF
So you can see that the code works is actually
implemented in C.
NOTE CONF
Who's heard of the C programming language.
Almost everybody okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's quite small and simple.
Um, and it obviously works.
NOTE CONF
Let's test it with QuickCheck.
Now, you have presumably seen QuickCheck.
NOTE CONF
Um, for the case of testing pure functions only.
Oh dear me.
NOTE CONF
Why can't I?
Okay, this seems to have.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Please come back.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
So how do we how do we test these things
with sequences of operations where we generate a sequence of
NOTE CONF
API calls?
It's just a list.
NOTE CONF
I'm sure you've been using lists.
Um, we make a simple model state.
NOTE CONF
So in the case of a queue, we model the
contents just by the list of numbers that should be
NOTE CONF
in it.
And then we write post conditions for each operation to
NOTE CONF
check that the result is right.
So all of this stuff is written in Erlang apart
NOTE CONF
from the code itself.
So we use Erlang for testing code in all kinds
NOTE CONF
of programming languages.
See for example as an example.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's a test case that we might use for
queues where we put three numbers in.
NOTE CONF
We get two numbers out and we can model the
state just by a list.
NOTE CONF
It's very slightly more complicated than that.
But the principle is here.
NOTE CONF
And then we write post conditions that just check that,
um, you can see every call to get returns.
NOTE CONF
The first element that was in the queue when we
call it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, we won't bother with the code fragments.
Let's just run some tests.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Can we see this?
NOTE CONF
Nope.
Why can we see nothing?
NOTE CONF
Now we can see it.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so.
Let me compile my airline code, which is my specification.
NOTE CONF
And then I'll just use the Erlang version of QuickCheck.
To test the code.
NOTE CONF
Dawn, look.
So what happened?
NOTE CONF
What happened here was, first of all, we generated a
long random test.
NOTE CONF
Here it is.
It's got 32 steps.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This test failed.
NOTE CONF
Would you like to debug a test case with 32
steps?
NOTE CONF
No.
But then you've seen shrinking happening.
NOTE CONF
Here it is.
It's happened here.
NOTE CONF
And we end up with this test case with three
steps.
NOTE CONF
And what is happening?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Look at this.
This part of the screen shows us what happened.
NOTE CONF
So we created a queue of size one.
We put one value into it, and then we asked
NOTE CONF
the size.
How many elements are in the queue now?
NOTE CONF
One.
What does size return?
NOTE CONF
Zero.
Zero is not equal to one.
NOTE CONF
And so the test fails.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So why did this happen?
Well let's have a look at the code.
NOTE CONF
So here is the code for put.
So as I said, this is in the C programming
NOTE CONF
language, which I realise you're not familiar with.
But, um, uh, what's happening here is that we are
NOTE CONF
taking the value n, and we are writing it into
a buffer at a position determined by Q arrow imp,
NOTE CONF
the input pointer.
And then we're incrementing the input pointer modulo the size
NOTE CONF
of the q.
What is the size of the q one.
NOTE CONF
So we're changing the input point from 0 to 0
plus one.
NOTE CONF
That's one modulo one.
What's one modulo one zero.
NOTE CONF
Ah.
So I bet looking at that code it looks right,
NOTE CONF
but it's not.
So the problem here is that when you put a
NOTE CONF
value into the buffer, the input pointer wraps around back
to the beginning immediately.
NOTE CONF
So the q that is full.
Looks exactly like a queue that is empty.
NOTE CONF
And so the size function gets confused and returns zero.
So that's not right.
NOTE CONF
So how can we fix this?
Um, it turns out that this is a well known
NOTE CONF
problem, and there is a well known way of fixing
it.
NOTE CONF
So this is the code that creates a new queue.
And if you think about it, you'll see that this
NOTE CONF
problem of the input pointer wrapping around when the thing
is full that's going to hit every size of queue,
NOTE CONF
not just queues of size one, and it's going to
hit us when the queue becomes full.
NOTE CONF
It's going to look empty.
So here's the trick.
NOTE CONF
Well, I'm asked to create a queue of size n.
I will actually create one of size n plus one.
NOTE CONF
Don't tell anybody.
Now this means that if anybody sees my bug, they
NOTE CONF
must first have put N plus one items into a
queue of size n, and what does that mean?
NOTE CONF
That means it's their fault.
And I escaped blame.
NOTE CONF
And this is the goal of all good software engineering.
Okay, so I've made that change.
NOTE CONF
Now I'm going to recompile the C code.
Um, which I do like this.
NOTE CONF
And now I just want to rerun that test.
And I can do that with this version of QuickCheck
NOTE CONF
just by saying aeccae check.
So this is a special function that reruns the last
NOTE CONF
failed test.
What do you know?
NOTE CONF
It passes now.
That's great.
NOTE CONF
So that seems to work.
Let's just run a few more random tests to be
NOTE CONF
sure.
Darn, it still doesn't work.
NOTE CONF
Look at what happened here.
We made a queue of size one.
NOTE CONF
That's really two.
We put two items in.
NOTE CONF
So that input pointer will have wrapped around back to
zero.
NOTE CONF
We took one item out.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We put two things in.
We took one thing out.
NOTE CONF
How many things are in the queue?
One.
NOTE CONF
What does size return?
Minus one.
NOTE CONF
That can't be right.
Let's look at the code for the size function which
NOTE CONF
is down here.
So it's just taking the difference between this input pointer
NOTE CONF
which is zero and this output pointer which is one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's zero minus one.
That's minus one modulo the size which is two.
NOTE CONF
What is minus one modulo two.
It's plus one.
NOTE CONF
I have a mathematics degree.
I know that.
NOTE CONF
But is this the modulo operator?
No, it's the C remainder operator, which, if this argument
NOTE CONF
is negative, gives a negative result.
And obviously the size of the queue should never be
NOTE CONF
negative.
So what I have to do is to make sure
NOTE CONF
that this expression is never negative.
How can I achieve that?
NOTE CONF
There we are.
Let's take the absolute value.
NOTE CONF
Whoops.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And now if I recompile the C code again.
And rerun that last test it passes.
NOTE CONF
So actually now we're in a situation which is.
rather like a situation that arises a lot in industry.
NOTE CONF
We found a bug.
We created a test case.
NOTE CONF
We've just run it.
That provokes the bug and we fix the code.
NOTE CONF
And now that test passes, all our tests are green.
So we're done.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Shall I run some more random tests just to see?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Darn.
Not done.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What happened here?
NOTE CONF
We started off by creating a queue of size two.
That's really three.
NOTE CONF
This is progress.
This is a shrunk example.
NOTE CONF
We create a queue of size two because queues of
size one work now.
NOTE CONF
Great.
And then what happened?
NOTE CONF
We put three things in.
So we made that input pointer wrap around.
NOTE CONF
We took one thing out.
How many things are in the queue?
NOTE CONF
Two.
What are the size?
NOTE CONF
Function?
Return?
NOTE CONF
One.
Why?
NOTE CONF
Because now that C code is computing minus one modulo
three.
NOTE CONF
That is two mathematically.
But the absolute value just converts to minus one into
NOTE CONF
a plus one.
So this was the wrong thing to do.
NOTE CONF
We made a patch that actually just made the problem
worse by disguising the bug in the simplest case that
NOTE CONF
could provoke it before.
Now, the right way to fix this is to make
NOTE CONF
sure this expression is positive without changing its value modulo
size, and that we can do by just adding on.
NOTE CONF
The size again.
Okay, so now this is always going to be positive.
NOTE CONF
And it should should be returning the correct result.
So let's recompile the C code.
NOTE CONF
Rerun that last test?
Yes, we fixed that.
NOTE CONF
Run some random tests.
Ooh, 100 tests passed.
NOTE CONF
Now.
Are we satisfied?
NOTE CONF
Let's.
Okay, so at this point, I would normally run tests
NOTE CONF
for maybe ten minutes.
Um, let's just run them for 10s.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now each dot is 100 tests.
NOTE CONF
Um, whoops.
There we are.
NOTE CONF
4700 tests.
Say it works now.
NOTE CONF
I'm happy.
My code is perfect.
NOTE CONF
Actually, as far as I know, it does work now.
Okay, so let us go back to.
NOTE CONF
My story.
Okay, so what I wanted to show you with that
NOTE CONF
was, um, an example where we write one property.
So we wrote one property that said the C code
NOTE CONF
behaves in a way that that matches the state machine
model, and that property can be used to find many
NOTE CONF
different bugs.
And I hope what I showed you when we looked
NOTE CONF
in each case at a minimal failing example, I hope
you'll agree with me that seeing those minimal failing tests
NOTE CONF
makes diagnosing the problems very easy.
So we think of shrinking as like extracting the signal
NOTE CONF
from the noise of random tests.
Random tests contain a lot of noise.
NOTE CONF
That is their purpose.
That's why they're good at provoking faults, at provoking problems
NOTE CONF
you wouldn't think of testing for.
But it's useless for debugging.
NOTE CONF
But when we shrink a failed random test and we
get a signal, then we get a minimal test that
NOTE CONF
is easy to debug and that makes problems easy to
find.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, the C code in this case was only a
NOTE CONF
few lines.
Can we do this for real?
NOTE CONF
Well, let me tell you about one of the larger
projects we've done at the company.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we tested the outer SAR basic software for Volvo
cars.
NOTE CONF
So what is outer SA?
Outer SA is a standard for the software and vehicles.
NOTE CONF
And the idea is that if the people who make
components and subsystems for vehicles follow the standard, then when
NOTE CONF
you plug them together, they'll just work.
And in this diagram you can see the basic software.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this is software that is supposed to run
on every processor in a car.
NOTE CONF
And there can be 100 of them nowadays.
Um, So if you look at the diagram you recognise
NOTE CONF
on the right hand side you can see the Ethernet
there.
NOTE CONF
That is a network.
These four vertical columns are protocol stacks.
NOTE CONF
The Can bus is one that's very heavily used in
cars.
NOTE CONF
And every coloured box is a module that is described
by the standard that is supposed to exist.
NOTE CONF
And these coloured boxes, they're all described by a PDF
of 1 or 200 pages.
NOTE CONF
So what's the point of this standard?
Well, the theory is that car manufacturers should be able
NOTE CONF
to buy code from different providers and just have them
work.
NOTE CONF
What happens in practice?
If you buy all your code from the same provider,
NOTE CONF
it probably will work seamlessly.
But if you want to play them off against each
NOTE CONF
other and get the parts you know at the lowest
price, which Volvo Cars wants to do.
NOTE CONF
Well, it turns out that's often not the case.
Or what really happens is when you first put a
NOTE CONF
car together, you can't even boot it, let alone drive
it.
NOTE CONF
So they hired us to develop QuickCheck tests for the
vendor's software, the vendor's implementations for basic software to make
NOTE CONF
sure they really were following the standard.
Um, here's one bug that we found.
NOTE CONF
This was a bug in a canvas stack and on
the canvas.
NOTE CONF
Every message has a message identifier, which is also its
priority.
NOTE CONF
The smaller the number, the higher the priority.
So in this test case, what's happening is we're first
NOTE CONF
of all sending a message with priority one that gets
sent straight away.
NOTE CONF
And then we call functions to send messages with with
priority two and three.
NOTE CONF
But the bus is busy.
So those messages cannot be sent yet.
NOTE CONF
So they get queued up in the protocol stack.
And then the last step in the test case is
NOTE CONF
a function that is usually called by the software.
You know, the hardware bus driver software.
NOTE CONF
So it says confirming transmission of message number one.
So now the stack should select the next message to
NOTE CONF
send on the bus.
Which message should it send?
NOTE CONF
The one with priority two.
Which message did it send?
NOTE CONF
The one with priority three.
How so?
NOTE CONF
Well, we had the source code in this case.
So to explain why this happened, I have to explain
NOTE CONF
that the Can bus standard is quite old.
And when it was first defined then 11 bits were
NOTE CONF
set aside for these can IDs.
But that means you could only have 200 different kinds
NOTE CONF
of message in the whole car.
It's just not enough for a modern vehicle.
NOTE CONF
So there's a new version of the standard that permits
extended canids of 29 bits.
NOTE CONF
You get to get a lot more message types in
there, but it all has to be backwards compatible.
NOTE CONF
So you can still use a standard canid if you
like.
NOTE CONF
And this particular protocol stack supported both.
And it stored the ID in an unsigned 32 bit
NOTE CONF
integer.
But it needs to remember whether it's a standard or
NOTE CONF
an extended canid, because it has to generate packets within
a different format depending on which.
NOTE CONF
So they use the top bit of this 32 bit
identifier integer to record whether it was an extended or
NOTE CONF
a standard canid.
Of course, no reason you shouldn't do that.
NOTE CONF
Here's what I didn't tell you about that example.
The message with priority two had an extended canid.
NOTE CONF
And guess what?
When comparing the priorities of messages.
NOTE CONF
If you're going to do this, it's important to mask
off that top bit because it really makes no difference
NOTE CONF
to the priority.
What kind of ID and message has.
NOTE CONF
And the developers had forgotten to do this.
So that message with priority two that was treated as
NOTE CONF
a message with priority two to the 31 plus two.
No wonder it was sent last.
NOTE CONF
So I really like this example.
Um, it shows the power of shrinking.
NOTE CONF
So, you know, a much more complicated test was generated
to begin with that shrank down to these four steps.
NOTE CONF
It shows that this message, this method, can find bugs
like forgetting to mask off a bit in a low
NOTE CONF
level C program, and it can generate a small test
case that provokes the bug and makes it easy to
NOTE CONF
find.
I also like it because it's important.
NOTE CONF
Everything in the car talks on the canvas, and those
priorities are there for a good reason.
NOTE CONF
Here's a tip.
Next time you're doing emergency braking, don't adjust the volume
NOTE CONF
on the radio.
The volume messages might take priority over the braking one
NOTE CONF
if they got the priorities wrong.
So you know it's a matter of life or death.
NOTE CONF
Perhaps we read 3000 pages of PDFs to write this
code.
NOTE CONF
That turned into about 20,000 lines of QuickCheck code.
We tested a million lines of C code from six
NOTE CONF
different suppliers, and we found more than 200 problems.
More than 100 of them were problems in the standard
NOTE CONF
itself.
So, I mean, don't be impressed by something just because
NOTE CONF
it's called a standard.
If it's a long document that has not been tested,
NOTE CONF
it's likely to contain mistakes and Our code was ten
times shorter than comparable test code when we found anything
NOTE CONF
similar at all.
So I showed you a demo using very small programs.
NOTE CONF
You might have wondered, does this method scale to large?
You know, large amounts of code?
NOTE CONF
Yes it does.
The last story I want to tell you is a
NOTE CONF
story about some industrial Erlang code, which starts with a
message to the Erlang mailing list back in 2007.
NOTE CONF
We know there's a lurking bug somewhere in the debt's
code.
NOTE CONF
We've got bad objects and premature end of file every
other month.
NOTE CONF
For the last year, we've not been able to track
the bug down because the file is repaired automatically next
NOTE CONF
time it's opened.
Okay, so I'm sure you can feel too bad Turnquist
NOTE CONF
Distress, but we can all feel sorry for him.
But you don't know the context of this.
NOTE CONF
Oh, maybe you are aware of Klarna nowadays.
Klarna.
NOTE CONF
Well known in Scotland too.
So back at this time it was a relatively small
NOTE CONF
Start-Up company in Sweden.
And they provided invoicing services for web shops.
NOTE CONF
They needed a database to do that.
And they used the one that came together with Erlang.
NOTE CONF
That's a distributed database that provides database transactions, distribution, replication
of data, backups, lots of lots of good stuff, but
NOTE CONF
it needs a back end to actually store the data
in files.
NOTE CONF
And that back end is called debts.
It stores tuples.
NOTE CONF
You've studied tuples and Haskell stores the same kind of
thing in Erlang in files.
NOTE CONF
So that's based on top of the file system.
And Dex was the component that was crashing every couple
NOTE CONF
of months.
And when something fails as rarely as that, it's often
NOTE CONF
because of a race condition.
So these tend to lead to programs that work most
NOTE CONF
of the time.
But every now and then they fail and they can
NOTE CONF
fail catastrophically.
At the time, I was interested in testing for race
NOTE CONF
conditions, so let me explain how I did it.
First of all, let's go from the sublime to the
NOTE CONF
ridiculous.
Imagine testing something very simple.
NOTE CONF
Do you recognise this?
Maybe they don't exist anymore.
NOTE CONF
I don't think they exist anymore in Sweden, but it
used to be something that every bakery or deli counter
NOTE CONF
would have.
And people would come along.
NOTE CONF
They would take a ticket from this ticket dispenser, and
then the person behind the counter would call out the
NOTE CONF
next number and that person would go for service.
So suppose we were going to try and implement a
NOTE CONF
ticket dispenser in Erlang.
Well, we would have to define a take ticket operation.
NOTE CONF
And is that all you need?
Well, every now and then the roll of tickets runs
NOTE CONF
out, right?
And somebody comes along and puts in a new role.
NOTE CONF
So that's like resetting the ticket dispenser.
It'll go back to ticket number one.
NOTE CONF
So let's suppose that we just want to implement those
two operations.
NOTE CONF
Here is a unit test.
So this is a kind of test that people write
NOTE CONF
in the industry for all kinds of software that just
performs a number of calls and checks that the answers
NOTE CONF
are as they should be.
So what I've written here is a piece of Erlang
NOTE CONF
code that calls a reset.
It takes three tickets.
NOTE CONF
It does a reset, it takes another ticket, and it
pattern matches the result of each call against a pattern.
NOTE CONF
You've learned about patterns in Haskell.
They used a little differently in Erlang, but this just
NOTE CONF
matches and thus checks that you know the calls to
take ticket return one, two, three and one and the
NOTE CONF
two calls to reset return a constant called okay.
So how can we model that?
NOTE CONF
Well, it's very easy.
We'll generate sequences of reset and take operations.
NOTE CONF
We can model the state of the dispenser just by
the number of the next ticket, or maybe the number
NOTE CONF
of the previous ticket.
And then we can just check the results against the
NOTE CONF
model and make sure that they agree.
So that's all very well.
NOTE CONF
Right.
If those operations are performed in sequence.
NOTE CONF
But what if some of them are performed in parallel?
So what if two customers come along?
NOTE CONF
So first of all, somebody resets the ticket dispenser and
then two customers come along and one of them takes
NOTE CONF
two tickets.
For some reason, I mean, why not?
NOTE CONF
And the other one takes one ticket, but they're both
trying to do it at the same time.
NOTE CONF
Right now, the whole purpose of a ticket dispenser is
to regulate the flow of many customers so that two
NOTE CONF
customers should try and use it at the same time.
It's not a strange situation.
NOTE CONF
But now what are what are the expected results here?
Well, we might get okay from the reset.
NOTE CONF
And then the left customer might get tickets one and
two and the right one.
NOTE CONF
Ticket three.
But that's not the only thing that can happen, is
NOTE CONF
it?
It might be that the customer on the right gets
NOTE CONF
ticket number two, and the first one gets tickets one
and three.
NOTE CONF
In that case, the customer on the right kind of
leapt in in between.
NOTE CONF
It's a bit rude, but it's not wrong.
But this should never happen where both customers get ticket
NOTE CONF
number one.
So when we test this code, we want to run
NOTE CONF
parallel programs and we want to accept the first two
outcomes but not the third one.
NOTE CONF
So this is a bit awkward to write tests for
because there are three possible correct outcomes.
NOTE CONF
And this is only a small example, right?
Here's a larger parallel test.
NOTE CONF
How many correct outcomes are there of this test?
It turns out there are 30.
NOTE CONF
And that means that the conventional approach to testing, which
is to write down what results you expect.
NOTE CONF
It just doesn't scale to running this kind of test.
You can't do it with a conventional approach.
NOTE CONF
Can we do it with QuickCheck?
Well, the question is, can we write code that will
NOTE CONF
recognise a correct collection of outputs?
And the way that we do that is just to
NOTE CONF
search through all possible ways of ordering those calls.
So here in red we have an observed output.
NOTE CONF
And here we have a hypothesised sequence in which we
might have done those calls which explains the output that
NOTE CONF
we see.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And we explain it by looking at what the model
that we have says.
NOTE CONF
And.
So by doing that, we might have to search through
NOTE CONF
a large number of possible orders.
But if we can find an order that explains what
NOTE CONF
we see, we say, yes, the test passed.
If we can't, it must have failed.
NOTE CONF
So when I run tests, I have an implementation of
this stuff.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to demo it now, but when I
run tests, they fail.
NOTE CONF
And QuickCheck produces a little example like this.
It says if we run two calls to take a
NOTE CONF
ticket in parallel, they can both return ticket number one.
And there's no possible interleaving of these two calls that
NOTE CONF
can explain this result.
Um, this was the implementation I wrote for Take Ticket.
NOTE CONF
It's an Erlang.
It reads from a global variable the value n, and
NOTE CONF
then it writes n plus one.
And when you do that twice in parallel, it's possible
NOTE CONF
that both customers will do the read.
Both of them will compute.
NOTE CONF
They get the same value.
Of course, they'll both compute the same ticket to return,
NOTE CONF
and then they'll both write one back into the global
variable.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's a classic race condition.
And the point is not that this is a very
NOTE CONF
tricky race condition.
It's a very classic one, very well known one.
NOTE CONF
The point is that we can find it very easily.
So let's talk about debts, debt, stores, data.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it stores tuples in a file.
It stores many tuples.
NOTE CONF
Um, the tuples have curly brackets around them.
In Erlang, unlike Haskell, which has round brackets, the first
NOTE CONF
element of the tuple is the key.
And there are a bunch of operations that one can
NOTE CONF
perform.
One can insert a list of tuples into a table.
NOTE CONF
One can delete a key from a table, which will
delete all the tuples that have that key.
NOTE CONF
Um, insert new is like insert.
Except that if any of the keys is already in
NOTE CONF
the table, then it's a no op.
And there are other operations.
NOTE CONF
Basically, if you've used a tuple store ever, there is
nothing surprising.
NOTE CONF
There's just a bunch of operations and they are really
easy to model, right?
NOTE CONF
To model them and to predict how the code should
behave.
NOTE CONF
We just use a list of tuples to keep track
of what should be in the file.
NOTE CONF
So in this case, I wrote a quick check specification
that was less than 100 lines of code of the
NOTE CONF
core of the the database.
And that's pretty good because the actual code itself was
NOTE CONF
more than 6000 lines spread across four different modules.
It was supporting hash tables on the disk, multiple versions
NOTE CONF
of the format, you name it.
There are reasons why there was so much code, but
NOTE CONF
the core of its behaviour was quite simple, and I
started running parallel tests.
NOTE CONF
They failed immediately.
Look at this.
NOTE CONF
So what's happening here?
First of all, we have a prefix, which we do
NOTE CONF
first.
So we open the file and that creates a table.
NOTE CONF
And then in parallel we insert an empty list of
tuples into the table.
NOTE CONF
That's a no op that returned okay.
And then we use insert new to insert an empty
NOTE CONF
list of tuples into the table that also returns okay.
Now QuickCheck says there's no possible interleaving of these two.
NOTE CONF
But they were both okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So what's the problem?
Here's a tip.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes there's no alternative.
You just have to read the documentation.
NOTE CONF
Here's what it says about insert new.
Look at the result type.
NOTE CONF
It's supposed to be a boolean.
You studied buildings in Haskell, right?
NOTE CONF
They're either true or false.
Same in Erlang.
NOTE CONF
They're either true or false.
And I had previously run tens of thousands of sequential
NOTE CONF
tests of this code and insert new had returned.
True or false every time.
NOTE CONF
Now I suddenly run a parallel test and it returns.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Something's wrong.
Well, I went on.
NOTE CONF
I ran some more tests and got another one.
Here it is.
NOTE CONF
So here, first we open the file and then we
do two things in parallel.
NOTE CONF
We insert the tuple zero zero into the table, and
we use insert new to try and insert zero zero
NOTE CONF
into the table.
And that timed out.
NOTE CONF
And at the time I was doing this I had
only recently written the test code.
NOTE CONF
So I wondered, oh, is my code buggy or is
the bug in Dats?
NOTE CONF
How will I know that I noticed this message.
It looks as though the bug was in debt and
NOTE CONF
sure enough it was.
So at this point I decided insert new just doesn't
NOTE CONF
work.
Let's leave it out of our generated tests.
NOTE CONF
And I started generating tests so the rest of the
code.
NOTE CONF
Here's the third bug I found.
If you open a file first and then you do
NOTE CONF
two things in parallel, you reopen the file and in
the other hand and the other process, you insert zero
NOTE CONF
zero into the table.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that works.
Then you ask for the entire contents of the table.
NOTE CONF
What should be in there?
I just put in zero zero.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So I should get zero zero.
NOTE CONF
What did I get back?
The empty list.
NOTE CONF
Nothing.
No possible interleaving.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so you might think this.
This test looks a little suspicious because I'm re-opening the
NOTE CONF
file in a parallel process.
I should explain Erlang is a parallel programming language, is
NOTE CONF
designed for highly concurrent systems.
We expect there might be thousands of processes using the
NOTE CONF
database at the same time, all of them will need
to make sure it's open, so it's perfectly okay to
NOTE CONF
call open file in a parallel process while the file
is already open.
NOTE CONF
It should work, but it doesn't.
So I found these bugs and I was very pleased
NOTE CONF
with myself.
I sent them off to Ericsson, where there was a
NOTE CONF
man who was working on the code and maintaining it,
and he said, thank you very much, John.
NOTE CONF
But they're not the bugs that were behind the message
to the mailing list because the symptoms are different.
NOTE CONF
So I said, oh, that's pretty.
What are the symptoms?
NOTE CONF
And he said, well, the problem is that the file
is being corrupted.
NOTE CONF
So I asked him, how can I find out whether
the file is corrupt?
NOTE CONF
And he sent me one line of code that could
check to see whether the file was corrupt.
NOTE CONF
So I took my tests, and I just added that
line to the test so that the test said, well,
NOTE CONF
we run a parallel test.
The results should be explainable the way that we talked
NOTE CONF
about, and the file should not be corrupt.
I started running tests.
NOTE CONF
Ten minutes later, I found this bug.
Look at this.
NOTE CONF
What's it doing?
It's opening the file, closing it, opening it again, and
NOTE CONF
then doing three things in parallel.
It's inserting.
NOTE CONF
Uh oh.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
It's looking up the key zero in the table.
It finds nothing.
NOTE CONF
That's okay.
And then it's making two calls to insert to insert
NOTE CONF
a tuple zero zero into the table.
And both those calls succeeded and the overall result was
NOTE CONF
okay in that all the all the return values are
consistent with the model.
NOTE CONF
But when I checked for corruption what did I get
but premature end of the file.
NOTE CONF
So this corrupted the database.
Now what?
NOTE CONF
I love this example as well.
This was produced by shrinking a larger example.
NOTE CONF
When I looked at it, I thought, open, close, open.
Come on, that can't possibly be necessary.
NOTE CONF
So I manually simplified the test to just do an
open there, and I ran that simplified test tens of
NOTE CONF
thousands of times.
And guess what?
NOTE CONF
It passed every single time.
Open close open is necessary.
NOTE CONF
Why?
Because when we start the test, the file does not
NOTE CONF
exist.
That first open creates the file, then we close it.
NOTE CONF
Then we open an existing file that leads to a
very slightly different state.
NOTE CONF
And that's slightly different state is essential to making this
bug possible.
NOTE CONF
So I thought, okay, that's great, I turned it off.
I got the code fixed.
NOTE CONF
I was giving a talk at a developer conference shortly
afterwards, and what I was going to talk about, it
NOTE CONF
was nowhere near as much fun as this.
So I thought, I know.
NOTE CONF
I'll just make these slides and I'll spend half the
talk on the original topic, and then I'll talk about
NOTE CONF
this stuff.
So I did that.
NOTE CONF
But of course I hadn't kept the QuickCheck output, so
I had to rerun the tests.
NOTE CONF
And remember I said this one took ten minutes to
find as I was running the test to find this,
NOTE CONF
what did I find?
But this one.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what are we doing?
We open a file, we put a tuple into it
NOTE CONF
with a key one, and then we do two things
in parallel.
NOTE CONF
One of them is re-opening the file.
Remember we know that's a little dangerous.
NOTE CONF
And the other one is looking up zero which is
not there, and deleting the one which is there.
NOTE CONF
Everything all the results were okay, but when I checked
for corruption.
NOTE CONF
Bad object.
Here's the message again.
NOTE CONF
We know there's a lurking bug somewhere in the code.
We've got bad objects and premature end of file.
NOTE CONF
Every other month.
Last year, by the time I did this work, those
NOTE CONF
bugs were actually kicking in once a week.
And they were bringing down the main server at Klarna,
NOTE CONF
and it took several hours to bring it back up
again every week.
NOTE CONF
But in this case, when I reported these bugs, along
with these simple cases that provoke them.
NOTE CONF
The guy working with the code was able to fix
them each time within a day.
NOTE CONF
Before I did this work, of course, I was not
the first person to look for this bug, and the
NOTE CONF
best hypothesis that people had was, well, it seems to
happen when the file gets to around one gigabyte.
NOTE CONF
Maybe it's something to do with rehashing.
I know the guy working with the code had spent
NOTE CONF
more than six weeks at Klarna trying to track the
bug down.
NOTE CONF
Now we know that to provoke the bugs, you need
a database with at most one record.
NOTE CONF
Each bug can be provoked with only 5 or 6
calls.
NOTE CONF
And given those simple examples, it took less than a
day to fix and find to find and fix each
NOTE CONF
bug.
And that just shows the incredible power of shrinking.
NOTE CONF
And it shows how hopeless it is to look for
bugs like race conditions in errors that happen in production,
NOTE CONF
where not only the 5 or 6 relevant things have
happened, but millions of irrelevant things as well.
NOTE CONF
So tracking down the reason for a bug in that
situation is virtually impossible.
NOTE CONF
Property based testing.
It finds more bugs with less effort.
NOTE CONF
Don't write tests.
Generate them.
NOTE CONF
And that's what I've got for you.
Ask questions.
NOTE CONF
Not done.
Ask for questions.
NOTE CONF
Oh, yes.
Questions.
NOTE CONF
There's one.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Oh, well.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Just shout.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So this should be always guaranteed to generate the minimum
test case.
NOTE CONF
Um, in a certain sense.
So shrinking stops when all the ways in which we
NOTE CONF
can make the test case smaller lead it to a
test that also passes.
NOTE CONF
So it's a local minimum in that sense.
But what that means, it depends very much on which
NOTE CONF
smaller candidate tests we try.
And that is something that is partially provided by the
NOTE CONF
library and partially configurable.
So basically the idea is when you're using the tool,
NOTE CONF
then if you can think of a way of simplifying
a test that would make it easier to debug, you
NOTE CONF
can program that as a shrinking strategy.
And then it will be applied every time there is
NOTE CONF
a test that could potentially be simplified that way that
has failed.
NOTE CONF
So, you know, you can gradually, over time, build up
the power of your shrinking.
NOTE CONF
And it's worth spending time working on that, because it
makes every bug reported to you in the future simpler
NOTE CONF
to diagnose.
What else?
NOTE CONF
Any other questions?
No, I have a question.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I mean, do you do you get an estimate of
NOTE CONF
how much money?
Uh, you've saved a company like Klarna when they find
NOTE CONF
a bug like this?
You can try asking a company like Klarna how much
NOTE CONF
the particular bug would have cost them.
But don't expect an answer.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's commercially sensitive information.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I mean, you know that it's six, six man weeks.
Was it that was spent looking for the bug?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I.
Mean, that's that's already a bit of money.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, that's already quite a lot of money.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Anybody else?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well, uh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well let's thank.
NOTE CONF
John again then.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
That's all stuff they.
Got from your.
NOTE CONF